\chapter{Introduction}

Intro / Visions / Public Faces (14 p)

>>>Story hook: currently, this calls out to be a brief historical
sweep through self-driving car dreams from the 1920s/30s to the
present; but it could also begin with the reveal of the Google car; or
the Youtube video of the guy in the Mercedes tricking the lane assist
function to drive for him on the highway (2 p)

1) establish what the technology is: in its varied types and
dimensions: this is not ONE THING or ONE IDEA (4 p)
---INCLUDING historical models: see Erkki Huhtamo, media archaeology
(2 p)

2) deal in general with some of the popular portrayals of the
technology: the nature of the self-driving car as it will appear in
the near future is not self-evident, no matter how loud Google's voice
or how large their investment (4 p)
---you would be excused for thinking XYZ, based on what you read in
the popular press
---but this is a flawed picture of the future, and an incomplete
picture of the tech

3) and shift to the lead-in to the main thesis sections: that these
technologies or visions of them enact certain ideologically charged
activities (through their epistemologies; or even to some extent
ontological position of a self-driving car that ``knows'' nothing);
and that these can be traced through the histories and current
discourses of the fields involved, and lead us to expect very
different social/cultural impacts (2 p)


Note: I set out to plumb the depths of the cultural and social
implications of self-driving vehicle technology. In my naivete, I
conceived of driverless cars as just-another-AI-technology, something
understood and on which a meaningful ideological critique could be
based. But as I researched, I discovered that not only did
self-driving cars lack a fixed social meaning---their uses and
contexts still up for grabs---but the technology itself is unspecified
in profound and important ways. An apt lesson for an early researcher,
here was a thing which had not reached the stage of becoming, in
Latour's parlance, a ``black box,'' despite the media's treatment of
it as such. Below the surface, controversy bubbles. The deeper one
goes, the more ambivalent the mess becomes. Certain claims seem
constant across projects, but others differ wildly. Their stated goals
often seem subtly off-set from their assumptions and end-products. And
even more fundamentally, the idea of the ``self-driving'' vehicle,
where the human does nothing at all, is hardly a self-evident one.
Turning up other research paths---and indeed, numerous historical
counterexamples---made it painfully clear that the story I wanted was
not the story I could tell. The time had not yet come when the social
and cultural impacts could reasonably be predicted in a cohesive way.
But, as I think such things are absolutely fundamental to the way we
should think about new technologies, I am unwilling to drop them
entirely. So what follows is a patchwork, though, I hope, an artful
one. Several technological possibilities produce several visions of
what society might be, but each will ultimately have to come into
contest not only with physical reality, but the social realms of law,
technology, and public acceptance. Rather than taking the visions as
my starting point, I must dig deeper: putting them in the context of
historical fields and precedents, and shining light through their gaps
for all to see. And that is what I hope this project has become, a
deep look into the ideologies and rhetorics of the self-driving car,
one which not only touches upon what society might be like once these
vehicles are common, but what different models for these vehicles
exist, and what their public face might be if different people wrote,
and different ideas guided, their stories. Stories have power, and it
beehoves me, on finding the stories we tell to be so deeply one-sided,
to try to rebalance the narrative.
